Document the STS flow (#7639)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/reference/security/sts-login.md

---
title: Secure Token Service (STS) Authentication for lakeFS
description: Authenticate with lakeFS using Secure Token Service (STS) by leveraging a remote authenticator. This feature enables integration with Identity Providers (IdPs) for secure and efficient user authentication.
grand_parent: Reference
parent: Security
redirect_from:
  - /reference/remote-authenticator.html
---

# STS Login

Secure Token Service (STS) authentication in lakeFS allows users to authenticate via an Identity Provider (IdP), using a secure and efficient method.
This document outlines the process, from setting up the STS authentication flow to integrating with lakeFS through the [high-level Python SDK](../../integrations/python.md).

## Architecture

{: .note}
> The architecture does include the steps to generate the code using the remote authenticator. this should be done prior to the STS login flow.

> > There is a sample implementation to generate the code, redirect_uri and state at the end of this document.

Author: What would you suggest?

> > There is a sample implementation to generate the code, redirect_uri and state at the end of this document.

Reviewer: Adding a pre-requisite section or a title in that same section explaining you must have access to an OIDC provider and literally that text. 
just making it more clear what is expected

---
title: Secure Token Service (STS) Authentication for lakeFS
description: Authenticate with lakeFS using Secure Token Service (STS) by leveraging a remote authenticator. This feature enables integration with Identity Providers (IdPs) for secure and efficient user authentication.
grand_parent: Reference
parent: Security
redirect_from:
  - /reference/remote-authenticator.html
---

# STS Login

{: .d-inline-block }
<a style="color: white;" href="#sso-for-lakefs-cloud">lakeFS Cloud</a>
{: .label .label-green }

{: .d-inline-block }
<a style="color: white;" href="#sso-for-lakefs-enterprise">lakeFS Enterprise</a>
{: .label .label-purple }

{: .note}
> STS Login is available in lakeFS Cloud and lakeFS Enterprise. currently only tested on lakeFS Enterprise.

> Secure Token Service (STS) authentication in lakeFS allows users to authenticate via an Identity Provider (IdP), using OIDC Authentication workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secure Token Service (STS) authentication in lakeFS enables users to authenticate to lakeFS using temporary credentials obtained from an Identity Provider (IdP) via the OpenID Connect (OIDC) Authentication workflow..
```

> This document outlines the process, from setting up the STS authentication flow to integrating with lakeFS through the [high-level Python SDK](../../integrations/python.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document outlines the process, from setting up the STS authentication flow to using temporary credentials to interact with lakeFS through the [high-level Python SDK](../../integrations/python.md).
```

Author: Temporary credentials is quite confusing, because it's both what they get from the IDP, but mostly what they get from us (the token) 
WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Does short-lived token make more sense?

Author: it's about the same, it will be hard to differ them because they are basically the same thing, one provided by the Idp and one provided by us. let's use your suggestion, if it's confusing we will somehow change it

> ## Architecture

Reviewer 2: WDYT about moving the architecture section to the end of the page? this way we start with the "how to" and whoever is more interested in the details can continue reading

Author: How about before the Sample implementation?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good!

{: .note}

> > The architecture does include the steps to generate the code using the remote authenticator. this should be done prior to the STS login flow.

Reviewer 2: > The architecture does include the steps to generate the code using the remote authenticator.

The context for this sentence is not clear, can you please explain what was the intent?

Author: Changed, PTAL

> There is a sample implementation to generate the code, redirect_uri and state at the end of this document.

The STS authentication flow involves several components that facilitate secure communication between the lakeFS client, lakeFS server, the remote authenticator, and the IdP.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant A as lakeFS Client
    participant B as lakeFS Server
    participant C as Remote Authenticator
    participant D as IdP
    A->>B: Call STS login endpoint
    B->>C: POST idp code state and redirect uri
    C->>D: IdP request
    D->>C: IdP response
    C->>B: Auth response
    B->>A: auth JWT
```
- lakeFS Client: Initiates the authentication process by providing IdP credentials.
- lakeFS Server: Facilitates the authentication request between the client and the remote authenticator.
- Remote Authenticator: Acts as a bridge between lakeFS and the IdP, handling credential validation.

> - IdP (Identity Provider): Validates the provided credentials and returns the authentication status.

Reviewer 2: great section, thanks!

## Configuration

> To enable STS authentication, configure your lakeFS instance with the appropriate endpoint to the external Authentication Service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable STS authentication, configure your lakeFS instance with the endpoint of the external Authentication Service.
```

```yaml

auth:
    authentication_api:
        endpoint: <url-to-remote-authenticator-endpoint>

```

- `auth.authentication_api.endpoint` `(string: https://external.authentication-service/api/v1)` - URL to external Authentication Service described at [authentication.yml](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/blob/master/api/authentication.yml)

Ensure you replace <url-to-remote-authenticator-endpoint> with the actual URL of your Authentication Service.

> ## STS Login with high level python client

Reviewer 2: IMO the order of actions a user needs to take is not 100% clear. 
Can you create a numbered list of steps for configuration to a successful login?

Author: Sounds like a good idea, I'm not really sure how to do that, Add a previous section with steps and links?
One concern I do have with the steps is that (I'm assuming) the user configuring and the user using the log in with the high level python client are not the same user, also the configuration is a one time thing and the login is not, @talSofer  WDYT? is it even a concern?

Reviewer 2: > One concern I do have with the steps is that (I'm assuming) the user configuring and the user using the log in with the high level python client are not the same user

that's a good point. 

If we keep Configuration separate from Usage, how many steps there are before you can run the Python snippet?

Author: Only the steps for generating the `code` and `state` which is up to the client to configure in the way they want. so basically there are three separate independent (almost) steps
- configuration
- generating the `code` and `state` - which is up to the client but we have provided a sample code of how to do that
- generate client with the python wrapper (two lines of code)

The Python client simplifies initiating a client session with STS login. Use the following example to start a new session:

```python
import lakefs

> myclient = lakefs.client.from_web_identity(code = '', redirect_uri = '', state = '' , ttl_seconds = 7200)

Reviewer 2: empty strings are confusing here; I should use what I get from the remote authenticator, right?

Author: Yes changing

Reviewer 2: thanks :)

```

> ## Sample implementation to generate the code, redirect_uri and state

Reviewer 2: Why do we need to include sample code?

Author: Because it makes it more obvious what exactly I need to provide and it gives the user something to play with
This example is provided for auth0 but with a slight change it will work for other providers as well (I verified it on entra as well)

> The following code snippet demonstrates how to generate the code, redirect_uri and state values that are required to initiate a new client session using the STS login feature.

Reviewer 2: nit; missing whitespace

---
title: Secure Token Service (STS) Authentication for lakeFS
description: Authenticate with lakeFS using Secure Token Service (STS) by leveraging a remote authenticator. This feature enables integration with Identity Providers (IdPs) for secure and efficient user authentication.
grand_parent: Reference
parent: Security
redirect_from:
  - /reference/remote-authenticator.html
---

# STS Login

{: .d-inline-block }
<a style="color: white;" href="#sso-for-lakefs-cloud">lakeFS Cloud</a>
{: .label .label-green }

{: .d-inline-block }
<a style="color: white;" href="#sso-for-lakefs-enterprise">lakeFS Enterprise</a>
{: .label .label-purple }

{: .note}
> STS Login is available in lakeFS Cloud and lakeFS Enterprise. currently only tested on lakeFS Enterprise.

> Secure Token Service (STS) authentication in lakeFS enables users to authenticate to lakeFS using temporary credentials obtained from an Identity Provider (IdP) via the OpenID Connect (OIDC) Authentication workflow..

Reviewer 2: nit;
```suggestion
Secure Token Service (STS) authentication in lakeFS enables users to authenticate to lakeFS using temporary credentials obtained from an Identity Provider (IdP) via the OpenID Connect (OIDC) Authentication workflow.
```

> This document outlines the process, from setting up the STS authentication flow to using temporary credentials to interact with lakeFS through the [high-level Python SDK](../../integrations/python.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document outlines the process, from enabling STS authentication to using temporary credentials to interact with lakeFS through the [high-level Python SDK](../../integrations/python.md).
```

## Configuration

To enable STS authentication, configure your lakeFS instance with the endpoint of the external Authentication Service.

```yaml

auth:
    authentication_api:
        endpoint: <url-to-remote-authenticator-endpoint>

```

- `auth.authentication_api.endpoint` `(string: https://external.authentication-service/api/v1)` - URL to external Authentication Service described at [authentication.yml](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/blob/master/api/authentication.yml)

Ensure you replace <url-to-remote-authenticator-endpoint> with the actual URL of your Authentication Service.

## STS Login with high level python client

> The Python client simplifies initiating a client session with STS login. Use the following example to start a new session:

Reviewer 2: Maybe can change this sentence to highlight that the high-level Python client is THE way to do STS login ?

```python
import lakefs
myclient = lakefs.client.from_web_identity(code = '<CODE_FROM_IDP>', state = '<STATE_FROM_IDP>' , redirect_uri = '<URI_USED_FOR_REDIRECT_FROM_IDP>', ttl_seconds = 7200)
```

## Architecture

{: .note}

> > The architecture documentation begins at the stage following the generation of the code by the remote authenticator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The architecture documentation begins at the stage after the generation of the code by the remote authenticator.
```

> > Please be aware that the preliminary steps, including the code generation process that takes place between the user and their identity provider, are not included in this documentation.

Reviewer 2: I think that we should include this step in this guide. even if not with specific instructions. the goal is to understand when I need to take every step. 
maybe this should be step 1 in sts login? WDYT?
